tools: add ecosystem tools overview and use case in 3.0 (#2795) (#2797)
pingcap/docs: ecosystem-tool-user-guide.md

---
title: TiDB Ecosystem Tools Overview
category: reference

> aliases: ['/docs/v3.0/reference/tools/user-guide/','/docs/v3.0/how-to/migrate/from-mysql/','/docs/v3.0/how-to/migrate/incrementally-from-mysql/','/docs/v3.0/how-to/migrate/overview/']

Reviewer: ```suggestion
aliases: ['/docs/v2.1/reference/tools/user-guide/','/docs/v2.1/how-to/migrate/from-mysql/','/docs/v2.1/how-to/migrate/incrementally-from-mysql/','/docs/v2.1/how-to/migrate/overview/']
```

- Input: MySQL/TiDB cluster
- Output: SQL/CSV file
- Supported TiDB versions: all versions
- Kubernetes support: No

## Full data import

[TiDB Lightning](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-overview.md) (Lightning) is a tool used for the full import of large amounts of data into a TiDB cluster. Currently, TiDB Lightning supports reading SQL dump exported via Dumpling or CSV data source.

TiDB Lightning supports two modes:

- `importer`: This mode uses tikv-importer as the backend, which is usually for importing a large amount of data (at the TB level). During the import, the cluster cannot provide services.
- `tidb`: This mode uses TiDB/MySQL as the backend, which is slower than the `importer` mode but can be performed online. It also supports importing data to MySQL.

The following are the basics of TiDB Lightning:

- Input data source:
    - The output file of Dumpling
    - Other compatible CSV file
- Supported TiDB versions: v2.1 or later
- Kubernetes support: Yes. See [Quickly restore data into a TiDB cluster in Kubernetes using TiDB Lightning](https://pingcap.com/docs/tidb-in-kubernetes/stable/restore-data-using-tidb-lightning/) for details.

> **Note:**
>

> > The Loader tool is no longer maintained. For scenarios related to Loader, it is recommended that you use the [`tidb` mode of TiDB Lighting](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-tidb-backend.md#migrating-from-loader-to-tidb-lightning-tidb-backend) instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The Loader tool is no longer maintained. For scenarios related to Loader, it is recommended that you use the [`tidb` mode of TiDB Lighting](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-overview.md) instead.
```
